---
layout: post
title:  "How to plan a successful (and minimally stressful) live event"
date:   2022-02-28 10:27:00 +0000
categories: admin
---

Let's say you're planning an event. This can be a tricky and complicated
business, but it can be streamlined. This article is intended to help you
simplify the planning process as much as possible, such that on-the-night
logistical stress is minimised and everyone knows exactly what's supposed to be
happening. The #1 takeaway here is to **plan early** and **collect information
first**, but I'll go into more detail on good processes to follow below!

I should note that I am writing this from the perspective of a sound technician
that has worked on a wide range of events at Durham University, so a lot of the
specifics will be geared towards that niche, but the general process outlined
here is applicable to more or less any event. Essentially, your job as an event
organiser is to act as a central party who communicates with all the involved
stakeholders, collects all the information needed to run the event in one place
and ensures everyone knows what's going on.

# Step 1: Establish what you have at the venue
Probably the first step of planning an event is to decide on a venue. This could
be anything from a small local bar to a literal castle, but what they all have
in common is that they will provide you with a certain base level of equipment
for your event, as well as obviously the space(s) that it will take place in. In
all likelihood, they will invite you to the location to have a look around, and
this is the ideal time to discuss the first thing you need to know: what exactly
they have. Bring a clipboard!

First off, make sure to start a conversation about what exactly comes with your
booking - it may be that they will only provide power, or it may be that they
have loads of lighting, a stage and a speaker system. Knowing this in advance
will make life easier for technicians (as they won't need to bring or set up
equipment if it's already in the room) and cheaper for you (as you won't need to
hire equipment that doesn't get used because it's already in the room). It will
also ensure that there aren't any gaps - everyone will be clear on who is
providing what. While the representative from the venue will probably talk
through it in person, and noting down these things is good, it might be worth
asking for the list to be forwarded over email too, so you have this important
information straight from the horse's mouth.

As well as a list of the tech that comes with your booking, it's also useful to
draw up a quick map of the area's expected layout. This might seem unnecessary,
but remember that the people setting up the event probably haven't visited the
venue and therefore won't have the insight that you do. As well as things like
the room shape, stage area and table locations, it's very important to show the
locations of all power outlets and any other equipment that the venue is
providing. It's best to do this either whilst at the venue or straight after
your visit to ensure that it's fresh in your mind. I told you the clipboard
would come in handy.

# Step 2: Establish what your performers need
Next up, you're probably going to get in touch with some people to provide
entertainment at your event. Once you have people confirmed, get a rider from
(or at least confirm technical requirements with) **every single one**. That
includes dancers, speakers, photographers, karaoke machine providers and
unicyclists. You may find that many of them want little things like background
music, a green room or a power socket. Having all of this noted down ensures
that there won't be any surprises on the day when your extreme juggler suddenly
remembers he needs 24 speakers, a DJ, a light show and an inflatable water slide
for his death-defying performance in the middle of a field, 6 miles from the
nearest electrical outlet.

You will also want to chat with the performers about when they want to come to
the venue. It's likely that they will want to come and figure out layout,
execute soundchecks, and rehearse, and getting their timings down early will
make planning the day's logistics that much easier.

Obviously, riders are particularly important from musical performers, dancers
and other stage-based acts, so make sure they get them sent over ASAP.
Otherwise, you'll have to chase them for riders when your technician asks for
them in a few days' time and you'll lose a day or two of planning time while
they get back to you. If you need something to point to, I have a
[handy blog post](https://blog.barnabycollins.com/admin/2022/02/01/how-to-write-a-band-rider.html)
on that very subject.

# Step 3: Establish what you want
Now comes the fun bit. You have all the information at your fingertips, so have
a think about what kind of production value you want your event to have. If
you're technically inclned, have a look at various tech hires (if you're
Durham-based, the best place to start is
[durhamtech.org.uk](https://durhamtech.org.uk)), see what's on offer and compare
against your budget. If you're not technically inclined, though, don't worry!
It's still useful to think about how much you're willing to spend - as a guide
(at Durham college hire prices), a 'basic' setup (with minimal lighting, 1-2
main speakers, a mixer etc) will cost around £70 + VAT, a more advanced setup
(with stage monitors, slightly more lighting and a digital mixer) will cost
£150 + VAT and a really fancy setup (with posh lighting, nice light and sound
desks and maybe some staging) will cost £200+.

These numbers will also vary depending on how much your performers are
bringing - a band that brings their own amplifiers and drumkit will obviously
need less hire spend than one that doesn't. Remember also that you'll probably
want at least one technician, and these should charge £15-30 per hour. Finally,
while it may seem like needless spending to hire out nicer equipment that will
only service your technicians and band (things like nicer mixers or more stage
monitors) these things will allow those people to perform better: as an example,
pricier digital mixers feature really handy features like compressors and
wireless control that will allow a technician to really fine-tune the sound
versus a more basic analogue mixer.

You might want to establish contact with some technicians at this point, to make
them aware of the fact that you're interested in hiring equipment for your
event, but you will probably want to wait before you send all of the information
over, since there are a few more things to tie together.

# Step 3.5: Transport & logistics
By this point, you've probably also established what transport you're using. As
well as transport for your bands, guests etc, you may need to move technicians
and equipment to and from your event too. As a very rough guideline (again, at
Durham college hire prices), a small car will carry around £70-100 worth of
equipment. If you have coaches, obviously those will be capable of carrying much
more.

The other thing to consider at this step is things like rehearsals, setup and
soundchecks. Put simply, the longer you can leave between the start of setup and
the start of the event, the more time there is to iron out any bumps in the road
that crop up. If you've done all the above then those bumps are far, far less
likely to appear, but there's nothing wrong with planning for contingency, and
allowing more time will allow everyone to get things exactly how they should be
for your event.

Once you've got all of this planned out, write up a rough initial schedule for
the day. Include everything from vehicles going back and forth to soundchecks
and setup time. It's nice to have things planned out in your head, but getting
it down on paper will mean you have a nice table you can send to everyone
involved and thereby reduce logistical miscommunication.

I've put this step as a half-step because it's something that you've probably
been working on at the same time as the above things - between step 3 and 4 is
sort of the 'deadline' to have these details planned out (though it shouldn't be
100% finalised until after step 4, just in case there are any complications).

# Step 4: Fill in the gaps
Notice that actually hiring technicians and equipment is the last step. That's
because by this point you should have all the information that a technician will
need in order to plan and execute your event. That means all you really need to
do is send everything over in one go. If you've been thorough, it may well be
that the person on the other end goes *"Okay cool. You need this, this, this and
this and that will probably cost you somewhere in the region of £120"* with no
further back-and-forth needed. This is the ideal outcome, but it's also very
possible they have one or two minor things to clarify with you first.

# Step 5: Relax!
Congratulations! By this point everyone involved in your event knows exactly
what's going on. You'll probably want to circulate final arrangements with
everyone involved in order to ensure that everyone knows the situation, but
otherwise your event is all planned out! Have a cup of tea and reflect on how
awesome you are.

As a bit of an epilogue, I'm just going to quickly draw attention to what the
alternative to this process is. As tempting as it may seem to get in touch with
the people providing you with technicians and equipment first so they can help
you through the process, sending emails back and forth with every new thing is a
waste of your and their time. You would essentially be acting as a go-between,
and they would have to go through the above and talk to performers/venue through
you. That's not your job or their job, and giving them the contact details for
the other parties so they can liase directly cuts you out of the loop entirely,
meaning there's potential for things like spending decisions to be made without
your consent. I should note that emailing technicians early to confirm that you
would like to use their services is a perfectly reasonable thing to do, but you
should make it crystal clear that you are collecting information in the
background and will get back to them once you have it all in one place.
