---
layout: post
title:  "Hello there ðŸ‘€"
date:   2022-01-31 17:57:00 +0000
categories: meta
---

As you may have noticed, this is a blog. Yes, I've started a blog.

When doing sound tech stuff, I've often come across little things that have
taken a bit of time to figure out. I've also often wished I had something to
point to when less-knowledgeable people asked a frequently-asked-question. For
example, I often had to explain what I expected from a band's rider.

For those wondering, I'm a sound technician with some (admittedly quite limited)
experience working on a range of different events at Durham University. At my
university, there are many different technician collectives (for the most part,
one for each college plus a couple for specific groups) but the vast majority of
these are more lighting/theatre-focussed than sound focussed - resulting in a
surprisingly small group of sound specialists (and an imbalance of training,
making it hard to become a sound specialist without working with someone who was
one already).

I've also always wanted to figure out Jekyll as I've used GitHub Pages for a
long time but never really got into any of its cooler functionality. So it
seemed like a smart idea to solve all these problems in one go.

The intention of this blog is to serve as a repository of information that I can
point to. I'd also like to start writing a bottom-up tutorial series on sound
tech basics, because (while I admittedly haven't searched for this too much) it
seems like it's hard to come by a good centralised resource for sound tech
advice.

So my (potentially somewhat self-important) quest with this blog is to try and
create something that covers the practical basics of how to do sound on a
day-to-day basis, built on things I've learned the hard way over the past couple
of years.

I guess I'd better get on with that.
