---
layout: post
title:  "Sound tech basics for DJs"
date:   2023-05-02 15:48:00 +0000
categories: live-events
---

Welcome to my first blog post in a while. This one is aimed at DJs, and should
cover the basic technical knowledge and skills that are needed to run a dance
music event.

I'm going to start by explaining how sound signals actually work, before
explaining the signal flow through a typical DJ setup, and finally briefly
covering acoustics.

## Audio signals

### What an audio signal actually is

For the purpose of this post, I'm going to portray sound signals using waves.
You're probably familiar with waves already from your library preparation
software or any production experience you already have, but I'll go a bit deeper
on what the wave actually means now.

These plots are simple - on the x-axis is time, and on the y-axis is air
pressure. So, essentially, you can think of a sound wave as just a plot of a
speaker diaphragm's position over time. If the line at a particular point is
high, the speaker diaphragm will be 'pushed out' at that time when playing back
the sound. If the line at a particular point is low, the speaker diaphragm will
be 'pulled in'. The inverse is true for the diaphragm of a microphone when you
record something - the microphone diaphragm converts movement to voltage.

Speaker diaphragms are moved by strong electromagnets at their centres, which
convert voltage into movement. So, when we transmit audio through a speaker, the
electromagnet is converting a high voltage to a pushing out force on the speaker
diaphragm, and a low voltage to a pulling in force on the speaker diaphragm.

So, a typical sound wave might look like this:

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/2aeoaedz8u" style="min-height:200px" width="100%"></iframe>

There are five things that define a signal: its channel count, its level,
whether it's analogue or digital, the connector it uses, and whether or not it's
balanced. Balanced audio is important in live music, but less important for DJs,
so I'll talk about the first four now and skip balanced audio until the end of
the article.

### Audio channels

An audio channel is really just a single fluctuating voltage. In DJing, all
signals have either one channel or two channels. A signal with one channel is
'mono', and a signal with two is 'stereo'.

Stereo music is just music with a left and a right channel, designed to match
the left and right ears on a typical person. The two separate channels can play
completely separate sounds in theory, but they generally play similar things
with minor variations intended to give the track some 'width'.

For example, the volume of a particular component of a track can be varied
between the left and right channels to choose where it sounds like it's coming
from - if it's stronger in the left channel than the right channel, then it
sounds like it's physically slightly left of centre.

Converting from mono to stereo is pretty straightforward - if we have a mono
track to be split into stereo, we simply play the same mono signal on both
channels (resulting in no particular width).

Converting from stereo to mono involves a process called 'summing' - the two
signals are simply added together. For example, these two signals:

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/hxtcmzwoyd" style="min-height:400px" width="100%"></iframe>

sum to make:

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/77z3t4gpmu" style="min-height:200px" width="100%"></iframe>

Almost all modern tracks are produced in stereo, so if you have a stereo speaker
system it's generally preferable to ensure that the signal chain is stereo all
the way.

## Signal levels

One thing to be aware of is the concept of a signal 'level'. A signal's level is
essentially just its strength. Common signal levels include:

- Line level
  - This is a standardised signal level, designed for sending audio signals
    between mains-powered devices.
  - It's a medium-strength signal.
  - 'Consumer' and 'pro' equipment have slightly different standards for
    line-level audio, but these standards are generally compatible if you don't
    push your volume too high.
- Mic level
  - This is the level that a mic might produce.
  - It's generally very weak.
  - It is not standardised, and varies depending on microphone design.
- Phono level
  - This is the level that a turntable (aka 'phonograph') cartridge produces.
  - It's also very weak, and varies depending on the particular cartridge model.
  - Phono signals are quite interesting so will be elaborated on later.
- Speaker level
  - This is the voltage that is fed into a speaker's diaphragm.
  - It needs to have a high enough voltage to physically move a speaker cone
    through the air.
  - It's therefore much stronger than line level.

In general, signals start off weak at the source and get stronger as they
progress through a signal chain from sound source to speaker.

In case you hadn't guessed, signal strengths are increased by amplifiers.
Microphone and phono signals are generally increased to line level by dedicated
amps called called 'pre-amplifiers' or pre-amps. Pre-amps are placed as early as
possible in the signal chain - so any mic/phono input on a mixer will naturally
have a pre-amp built in behind the connectors. Line level inputs don't need
pre-amps though, for obvious reasons.

## Analogue vs digital

So, we're familiar with analogue signals. Next up, digital signals. I won't go
into too much details, but essentially a digital signal turns a sound system
into a series of numbers rather than as a wiggly line on, say, a vinyl record.

It checks what the signal's voltage is (or 'samples' it) several tens of
thousands of times a second, and uses those numbers to describe the signal. A
device playing back a digital signal simply joins the dots back up. You might
think that the 'steppyness' of a digital signal would affect the sound, but a
low-pass filter and some clever maths called the Nyquistâ€“Shannon theorem
actually means that a digital signal is capable of perfectly describing any
analogue signal, provided that there is an upper limit on the frequencies we try
to recreate. Humans are physically unable to hear frequencies above 20kHz, so
this limitation is fine. Devices that convert between digital and analogue are
called digital to analogue converters, or DACs - I'll leave it to you to guess
what an ADC does.

In general, digital audio is better than analogue audio - it is immune to
interference and capable of carrying multiple channels down a single cable.

There is a separate analogue/digital discussion, unrelated to the audio signals
that connect your devices together - that of analogue and digital DJ mixers.
Analogue mixers such as Allen & Heath's Xone line are fully analogue, meaning
that your audio signals travel through the whole mixer without any digital
signal processing (DSP). However, the effects units in modern mixers are built
on DSP - so these mixers do not include effects past EQ and filters (which can
be easily recreated with analogue circuitry).

## Audio connectors

You've probably noticed that there are several different ways of sending audio
between devices. I'm going to quickly cover the common audio connectors now.

I'm going to mention balanced audio in this section, so if you're not sure what
that is, balanced signals are less prone to interference. I'll expand on
balanced audio a bit more later on.

### Analogue RCA

<img src="/assets/images/rca.jpg" height="200px">

Most commonly used to connect DJ players to mixers, the RCA cable carries the left
and right channels at line-level along two separate cables. White is left and
red is right, and the signals carried by RCA are unbalanced.

RCA is easy to accidentally unplug, and sometimes has connection issues -
particularly if you're using cheap plugs. Cheap RCA connectors with
'flower'-shaped ends (see the four 'petals' around the central pin in the image
above) are bad, as they can be bent out of shape easily, resulting in a loose
connection. Connectors with outer rings that fully surround the centre pin are a
better pick if you have the choice.

### S/PDIF (Digital RCA)

<img src="/assets/images/spdif.jpg" height="200px">

The digital connectors on CDJs and/or mixers use a protocol called S/PDIF to
transmit digital audio through RCA cables. If your mixer and CDJs both support
it, it's generally preferable as it minimises the number of conversions between
analogue and digital that take place between your USB stick and the master
output.

In all physical aspects, digital RCA is identical to analogue RCA, so the cables
are fully interchangeable.

### XLR

<img src="/assets/images/xlr.jpg" width="200px">

XLR cables are the industry standard way of moving audio around, for good
reason. XLR commonly carries both mic and line-level audio, and is balanced
thanks to the presence of a third pin (more on that later). It also has locking
connectors, meaning you can't yank it out without pushing a button on the input
side - though the mic inputs on the back of DJ mixers often don't feature a
lock.

It also has different connectors on each end, which means multiple XLRs can be
daisy-chained to produce a single longer cable. The upper 'female' connector
with the button plugs into outputs, and the lower 'male' connector plugs into
inputs.

XLR cables are expensive, but good quality cables are worth it for their
reliability. Bad quality connectors typically feel light or hollow in the hand,
whereas good quality connectors feel more solid and are made with tougher
materials. The above connectors are the good kind - the XLR standard was
designed by Neutrik and their plugs are still generally thought to be the best.

### 6.35mm (1/4")

<img src="/assets/images/ts-vs-trs.jpg" width="200px">

Otherwise known as 'big jacks', or just 'jacks', quarter-inch cables come in two
varieties - TRS on the left, and TS on the right. The difference between the two
is simply that TRS has one more pin - this is usually used either to send stereo
signals, or to send balanced audio like with XLR's third pin.

TRS connectors are generally preferable wherever possible, as balanced audio is
less susceptible to interference. However, TS is also commonly used,
particularly for guitars, guitar pedals and production gear. If a 1/4"
connection doesn't clearly state that it's balanced, it's more likely to be
unbalanced (but if in doubt the product manual will usually make clear which it
is).

In DJ situations, TRS cables are most commonly used for connecting the mixer to
the booth monitor speaker, but they can also be used for connecting mics or as
master outputs on some mixers. Both of these scenarios usually use balanced
audio, so TRS cables are definitely preferable.

The only exception is the send/return loops on mixers, which are typically
unbalanced. If you're fancy enough to be using the send-return loop, you
probably don't need TRS, but it may be worth checking the manual for your effect
unit and/or mixer.

Plugging TRS into a TS socket (or vice versa) won't break anything, particularly
if the TRS is being used for balanced - it's pretty idiot proof. However, if you
do happen to be using TRS for stereo instead of balanced audio, you may lose the
right channel - in most electronic music this isn't the end of the world, but
it's probably preferable to sum left and right to mono if you can. Bear in mind
that most DJ mixers offer the option to output in mono - either through a switch
on the front, or in a configuration menu.

In terms of quality, similar rules apply to XLR.

#### Speaker-level 6.35mm

Note that TS 1/4" cables are commonly also used for connections from amplifier
to speaker, particularly on very cheap passive systems. You should not use regular,
line-level TS cables for this, as a speaker level signal requires the cable to
transmit more power than a typical line-level cable is designed for.

If in doubt, look at the writing on the cable - if it says 'microphone cable' or
'instrument cable' then it's not appropriate for high-power signals. If it
mentions 'speaker cable' then it should be fine. A speaker cable will be
noticeably thicker and heavier than a line-level cable.

### speakON

<img src="/assets/images/speakon.jpg" width="200px">

Much like XLR, speakON is a type of cable designed by Neutrik specifically for
live scenarios. It's built to carry speaker-level signals, but is much better
suited to the job than jack cables. It has locking connectors, meaning it can't
be yanked out accidentally, can carry more power and is generally more reliable.

Plugging in or unplugging a speakON cable for the first time can be a confusing
experience, so bear in mind that you have to line up the (differently-sized)
protrusions on the connectors, insert it, then twist it. The lock should have
clicked into place. To unplug, just find and pull back the lock on the male
connector and reverse the steps.

## Advanced sound tech

### Phono signals and RIAA equalisation

Vinyl records come with a few specific challenges for mastering engineers and
listeners. There are two that are particularly interesting here: firstly, the
needle can easily skip, particularly when playing back loud bass frequencies.
Secondly, louder low ends require more physical space on the disc. Finally,
records famously have a certain level of hiss and crackle when playing back,
which tend to occupy the higher frequencies.

A technique called RIAA equalisation neatly solves both of these problems.
Essentially, before it is cut into the record surface, a track is equalised in
much the same way you're used to on DJ mixers. The high frequencies are boosted,
and the low frequencies are cut. Then, when the record is played back, the highs
are cut and the lows are boosted to compensate. This is done with a standardised
EQ curve defined by the Recording Industry Association of America in the 1950s.

The benefits here are two-fold: by reducing the level of the bass on the record,
we reduce the space needed and the likelihood of skipping. Separately, boosting
the high-end means that the high frequencies in the actual recorded music have
an advantage against the high frequencies created by hissing and crackling as
the needle travels through the groove.

The important thing to note here is that a signal coming from a turntable needs
equalising before it will sound correct. This is a built-in feature of pretty
much all phono preamps, so you shouldn't need to worry about it, but certainly
always make sure you're connecting turntables to inputs that expect phono
signals - failure to do this will result in a thin-sounding signal.

### Balanced audio

In order to transmit an electrical signal, we need two metal connections. One
way of understanding this fact is that, given we're building an electrical
circuit, the signal needs to flow 'through' the device on the receiving end. If
there was only one connection, the electrons wouldn't have anywhere to go. This
is true, obviously, but an analogy that makes life a bit simpler when talking
about audio signals is to think of each connection as transmitting a certain
voltage level.

Under this simplification, the reason we need two 'poles' to transmit a signal
is because, as well as the actual voltage of the signal, we also need a
'reference' level so we have something to compare to, also known as the
'neutral'. The property that decides how far the speaker moves is the difference
between the two voltages. We can call the reference level 0V, and the actual
signal might oscillate between +3V and -3V, for example.

Here's the above signal again, with the neutral voltage added in in green:

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/ux4ivanhv7" style="min-height:200px" width="100%"></iframe>

<!-- ## A sidenote

This system is good because it's normal for the voltages in electric devices to
fluctuate. There are many possible sources of this, including electromagnetic
interference, or even just some noise stemming from the 50Hz oscillation of
mains power in a particular device. If the neutral voltage on the sending device
is actually fluctuating between +1V and -1V, then that could be added to an
audio signal travelling through that device. But the neutral wire allows us to
compensate for it, because that same fluctuation will be present on the neutral
wire of the connection. Since we're looking for the difference between the
voltages, we get the signal that we want.

So, even if our two voltages are doing this...

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/2npjnrvpyn" style="min-height:200px" width="100%"></iframe>

...we get a resulting signal that looks like this:

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/wna588sirl" style="min-height:200px" width="100%"></iframe> -->

So, let's imagine that we're sending audio down a cable in the way described
above. All is going well, until something near the cable causes some
interference (represented in orange):

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/stwizvbbjn" style="min-height:200px" width="100%"></iframe>

Interference is a common problem, particularly with weak signals such as those
from mics. It can be caused by a whole range of devices and effects, and one
cable could even induce voltage into another if run close to it for some
distance. This interference will be audible in the reproduced sound, and
probably won't be very enjoyable for an audience to experience.

We have no way of stopping this under the current setup. But balanced audio
gives us a solution. We add a second signal, and we flip it. Now, if we get
interference, it affects both signals equally:

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/6ca4ji9cmd" style="min-height:200px" width="100%"></iframe>

This may not seem that useful, but the clever bit is what happens at the
receiving end of the signal.

The device receiving the signal flips the second signal back over again, giving
us two signals:

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/tvghptgepg" style="min-height:400px" width="100%"></iframe>

It then adds the two signals together...

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/qzkmewx6h5" style="min-height:200px" width="100%"></iframe>

cancelling the interference out entirely:

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/ctpukppvdc" style="min-height:200px" width="100%"></iframe>

So, essentially, balanced audio adds a second signal (and therefore a third pole
to the cable) and makes the signal travelling through that cable much more
resilient to interference.

### Building your own cables

One of the huge benefits of pro audio cables is that they can be disassembled and
re-soldered with relative ease. If you're skilled at soldering, or interested in
giving it a go, it's usually cheaper to buy cable and connectors separately and
construct your cables yourself. It also gives you the skills to repair almost all
audio cable faults yourself, and is very rewarding.

Most cables designed for pro audio (XLR, TRS, SpeakON, etc) can be disassembled in
this way - usually by unscrewing the metal or plastic 'boot' at the rear of the
connector.
